### Introduction
The Crosscut Metadata Model (C2M2) is a flexible metadata standard for describing experimental resources in biomedicine and related fields. A complete C2M2 submission, also called an "instance" or a "datapackage", is a zipped folder containing multiple tab-delimited files (TSVs) representing metadata records along with a JSON schema. 

Each TSV file is a **data table** containing various **data records** (rows) and their values for different **fields** (columns). **Entity tables** describe various types of data objects, while **association tables** describe the relationships between different entities. 

### Tutorials and Examples
For the April 2022 CFDE Cross-Pollination meeting, the LINCS DCC demonstrated a Jupyter Notebook tutorial on building the `file`, `biosample`, and `subject` tables for LINCS L1000 signature data. The code and files can be found at the following link: 

[LINCS C2M2 Demo (04-05-2022 Cross-Pollination)](https://github.com/nih-cfde/LINCS-metadata/tree/main/scripts/April-CrossPollination-Demo)

Code snippets from this tutorial corresponding to each step are reproduced below. 

### Helper Packages
The [c2m2-frictionless-dataclass](https://github.com/nih-cfde/c2m2-frictionless-dataclass/tree/main) repository includes the `c2m2-frictionless` Python package, which contains specific helper functions for C2M2 datapackage building and validation. This package is not designed to generate a complete C2M2 datapackage from any given data, but should be used in collaboration with the provided schema and ontology preparation scripts, as well as with DCC-specific scripts. 

### General Steps
The C2M2 datapackage building process will vary across DCCs, depending on the types of generated data, ontologies, and access standards in place. In general, the process will be as follows: 

1. Become familiar with the current structure of the C2M2, including the required fields across the entity and association tables, and download the most recent version of the [JSON schema](https://osf.io/c63aw/). Gather any metadata mapping files you may need. 

2. Identify the relevant namespace for all files, and build the `id_namespace` and `dcc` tables first. 

    - For LINCS, the namespace "https://lincsproject.org" is used. The following code will generate the LINCS `id_namespace` table: 
    ```
    pd.DataFrame(
      [
        [
          'https://www.lincsproject.org', # id
          'LINCS', # abbreviation
          'Library of Integrated Network-Based Cellular Signatures', # name
          'A network-based understanding of biology' # description
          ]
      ], 
      columns=['id', 'abbreviation', 'name', 'description']
    ).to_csv('id_namespace.tsv', sep='\t', index=False)
    ```

3. Identify all relevant projects and their associated files that will be included in the C2M2 datapackage. Generate container entity tables (`project`, `collection`) that describe logic, theme, or funding-based groups of the core entities. Note that projects and collections may be nested, in the `project_in_project` and `collection_in_collection` tables. 

    - In the LINCS tutorial, the data comes from the 2021 release of the LINCS L1000 Connectivity Map dataset. In creating a project representing the files from this dataset, there must also be an overarching root project for all LINCS data. 
    ```
    pd.DataFrame(
      [
        [ 
          'https://www.lincsproject.org', # id_namespace
          'LINCS', # local_id
          'https://www.lincsproject.org', # persistent_id
          date(2013, 1, 1), # creation_time
          'LINCS', # abbreviation
          'Library of Integrated Network-Based Cellular Signatures', # name
          'A network-based understanding of biology' # description
        ], 
        [
          'https://www.lincsproject.org', # id_namespace
          'LINCS-2021', # local_id
          'https://clue.io/data/CMap2020#LINCS2020', # persistent_id
          date(2020, 11, 20), # creation_time
          'LINCS-2021', # abbreviation
          'LINCS 2021 Data Release', # name
          'The 2021 beta release of the CMap LINCS resource' # description
        ]
      ], 
      columns=[
        'id_namespace', 'local_id', 'persistent_id', 'creation_time', 
        'abbreviation', 'name', 'description'
      ]
    ).to_csv('project.tsv', sep='\t', index=False)

    pd.DataFrame(
      [
        [
          'https://www.lincsproject.org', # parent_project_id_namespace
          'LINCS', # parent_project_local_id
          'https://www.lincsproject.org/', # child_project_id_namespace
          'LINCS-2021' # child_project_local_id
        ]
      ],
      columns=[
        'parent_project_id_namespace', 'parent_project_local_id',
        'child_project_id_namespace', 'child_project_local_id'
      ]
    ).to_csv('project_in_project.tsv', sep='\t', index=False)
    ```

4. Determine the relationships between files and their associated samples or biological subjects, as well as all relevant assay types, analysis methods, data types, file formats, etc. Also identify all appropriate ontological mappings, if any, corresponding to each value from above. 

    - The LINCS DCC includes internal drug, gene, and cell line identifiers, which were mapped to PubChem, Ensembl, and Disease Ontology/UBERON manually ahead of time, but other DCCs may already make use of the CFDE-supported ontologies. 
    - For instance, the LINCS signature `L1000_LINCS_DCIC_ABY001_A375_XH_A16_lapatinib_10uM.tsv.gz` comes from the biosample `ABY001_A375_XH_A16_lapatinib_10uM` (in this case an experimental condition) and the subject cell line `A375`; has a data type of expression matrix (`data:0928`); is stored as a TSV file format (`format:3475`) with GZIP compression format (`format:3989`); and has a MIME type of `text/tab-separated-values`. 
    - The `ABY001_A375_XH_A16_lapatinib_10uM` biosample was obtained via the L1000 sequencing assay type (`OBI:0002965`); comes from a cell line derived from the skin (`UBERON:0002097`); and was treated with the compound lapatinib (`CID:208908`). 

6. Either manually or programmatically, generate each data table, starting with the core entity tables (`file`, `biosample`, `subject`). This step will depend entirely on the format of a DCC's existing metadata and ontology mapping tables. 

7. Generate the inter-entity linkage association tables (`file_describes_biosample`, `file_describes_subject`, `biosample_from_subject`). 
    
    - In the LINCS tutorial, since the filenames come directly from the biosamples, once the `file` and `biosample` tables have both been built, `file_describes_biosample` can be generated. 
    ```
    fdb = file_df[['id_namespace', 'local_id']].copy()
    fdb = fdb.rename(
      columns={
        'id_namespace': 'file_id_namespace', 
        'local_id': 'file_local_id'
      }
    )
    fdb['biosample_id_namespace'] = fdb['file_id_namespace']
    fdb['biosample_local_id'] = fdb['file_local_id'].apply(file_2_biosample_map_function)
    ```

8. Assign files, biosamples, and subjects to any collections, if applicable, using the `file_in_collection`, `subject_in_collection`, and `biosample_in_collection` tables. 

    - Collections are optional, and can represent files from the same publications or other logical groupings outside of funding. 

9. Use provided [C2M2 submission preparation script and ontology support files](https://osf.io/bq6k9/) to automatically build term entity tables from your created files. 

10. Validate the final datapackage, containing all files and the schema, and submit! 

### Core Entity Tables
The basic experimental resources within the C2M2 are `file`, `biosample`, and `subject`. Each of these tables share a set of common metadata fields: 

- `id_namespace`: URI-prefix identifier 
- `local_id`: URi-suffix identifier 
- `persistent_id`: file_Resolvable URI permanently attached to an entity (e.g. download link or landing page)
- `creation_time`: Timestampe of entity creation/observation in YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS±NN:NN format
- `project_id_namespace`: URI-prefix identifier of overarching project for which the entity was created
- `project_local_id`: URI-suffix identifier of overarching project for which the entity was created

Additionally, each table has separate unique metadata fields:

**File:** A stable digital asset
- `size_in_bytes`: Filesize in bytes
- `uncompressed_size_in_bytes`: Fileize in bytes when decompressed
- `sha256`: SHA-256 checksum of the file
- `md5`: MD5 checksum of the file
- `filename`: Name of file with no path prefixes
- `file_format`: EDAM ID for the digital format of the file
- `compression_format`: EDAM ID for the compression method of the file, if applicable
- `data_type`: EDAM ID for data stored in the file
- `assay_type`: OBI ID for type of experiment performed to generate the file
- `analysis_type`: OBI ID for any analytic operation performed on file
- `mime_type`: [MIME](https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/media-types.xhtml) type describing this file

**Biosample:** A tissue sample or physical specimen
- `sample_prep_method`: OBI ID for sample preparation method 
- `anatomy`: UBERON ID for tissue origin of sample, if applicable

**Subject:** A biological entity from which a biosample can be generated
- `granularity`: One of multiple [classes](https://osf.io/gpf3d) of biosample sources
- `sex`: Biological sex of subject, if applicable
- `ethnicity`: Self-reported ethnicity of subject, if applicable
- `age_at_enrollment`: Age of subject at enrollment time in primary project, if applicable